---
layout: page
title: About
date: 2016-06-30
comments: false
---

This is the personal website of William Hicks: poet, physicist, and software
developer. Originally from Kennesaw, GA, he currently lives in Albany, NY.
William graduated from Brown University in 2012 with a Bachelor of Science in
physics and literary arts. His undergraduate physics thesis was entitled [*U(1)
charges in weakly-coupled free-fermionic heterotic string models*](
/assets/William_Hicks_2012_Physics_Thesis.pdf), for which he received the
Mildred Widgoff Prize for Excellence in Thesis Preparation. His undergraduate
literary arts thesis, a collection of poems entitled *Dayfall* was the
departmental nominee for the Brown Distinguished Thesis Prize.

After graduating from Brown, he went on to earn his Master of Science in
physics at Brandeis University in 2014, where he worked on high-performance
simulations of viral budding through cell membranes. He then returned to
Brown University, where he completed a Master of Fine Arts in literary arts in
2016. His MFA thesis (completed under the direction of Joanna Howard) was a
novel-in-verse entitled *Jornada del Muerto*.

William Hicks is the author of [*Stargazer's
Kitchen*](http://www.spdbooks.org/Products/9780996367707/stargazers-kitchen.aspx),
a collection of poems published by [Synecdoche](http://synecdochebooks.com/).
He is also the lead developer of
[Writing3D](https://github.com/wphicks/Writing3D), an open source project to
create a simple, user-friendly point of entry for creation of sophisticated
virtual reality (VR) content.

William's programming interests include high-performance computing, game
development, natural language processing, and VR applications. His literary
interests (which occasionally overlap) include visual poetry, narrative poetry,
and digital language arts. For more information about his software development
background, check out [his resum&eacute;](
/assets/William_Hicks_developer.pdf). For more information about his
literary background, check out [his academic CV](
/assets/William_Hicks_CV.pdf).

William's hobbies include long-distance running, boomerangs, and ballroom
dance. Keep an eye on this space for posts about programming, literature, and
all of these.
