---
layout: post
title: Symmetries
date: 2016-07-02
excerpt: "A digital poem based on universal symmetries"
project: true
tag:
- poetry
- dla
comments: false
---

# Symmetries

![symmetries_screenshot](/assets/img/Symmetries.png "Symmetries screenshot")

## Summary
 **Medium**: Custom Java software using the Processing library

 **Status**: Complete (2012)

 **Presentation/Publication history**: Interrupt II Conference (2012), NEASA
 Digital Revolutions Conference (2012), ELO Conference Gallery of First
 Encounters (2014)

## Description

*Symmetries* is a digital text comprised of about three hundred eighty
sextillion poems, or about one poem for each star in the universe. Each poem
can be read in a grammatically sensible way either left-to-right or
top-to-bottom. *Symmetries* does not just shuffle through these poems at
random, but in order to understand its movement, one must understand what
"symmetry" means to a physicist.

Perhaps the easiest way to understand the role of symmetries in physics is by
asking a simple question: What would happen if everything in the universe
suddenly moved one meter in the same direction? The answer, naturally, is that
nothing would happen, since physical laws don't change based on position. Over
time, physicists have discovered far less obvious symmetries in nature,
however. In fact, the transformations of every particle in the universe are
governed by three symmetries, known as SU(3), SU(2), and U(1). Almost
everything we understand about the fundamental building blocks of nature is
determined by these three symmetries[^2]. This is a breath-takingly beautiful idea:
Everything in the natural world, from the burning of distant stars to the
incredible variety of life on Earth, is connected by these three simple
symmetries; the universe is what it is because of these symmetries.

In *Symmetries*, words shift and interact according to exactly these three
symmetries, creating a miniature representation of every particle in the
universe. Furthermore, the harp in the background is not simply a looped
recording; it too changes according to the symmetries that describe our
universe.

## To View

*Symmetries* is available as a runnable jar which you can [download
here](/assets/Symmetries.jar). To run it, you should first make sure you have
[Java installed](https://java.com/en/download/help/index_installing.xml) on
your system. You should then be able to double-click on the downloaded jar file
to execute it on most Windows and Mac systems as well as many Linux desktop
environments.

You can also view video documentation[^1] of *Symmetries* below:
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zrXVyPVZ1HQ" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Footnotes
[^2]: Those readers with a physics background will note that this leaves out
      general relativity (equivalently gravity). Understanding general
      relativity in the framework described here is an open problem, but the
      left-right/up-down symmetry of each poem is a gesture toward the
      Poincar&eacute; group of *special* relativity.

[^1]: Due to Youtube formatting requirements, the video/audio quality is not
      ideal for this documentation, so I encourage you to check out the "live"
      runnable jar version if possible. Finding a way around these limitations
      is high on my ever-overflowing todo list, so you should hopefully see a
      cleaner version next time you visit.
