---
layout: post
title: Hello, would you like to take a survey?
date: 2016-07-09
excerpt: "A digital novel about censorship and surveillance"
project: true
tag:
- fiction
- novel
- dla
comments: false
---

# Hello, would you like to take a survey?

## Summary
 **Medium**: Digital interactive novel with browser integration

 **Status**: In development

## Description

*Hello, would you like to take a survey?* is a digital interactive novel[^1] about
the consequences of censorship and pervasive surveillance. Players attempt to
discover the truth about a recent terrorist incident that apparently takes
place near their real-world location on the day they begin playing. Their
investigation is not confined solely to interactions with the virtual world of
the novel, however. Players can search for information about the incident by
browsing real-world websites (Wikipedia, news sites, social media, etc.),
modified on-the-fly by the game to provide clues to the real story. By
interacting with the narrative just as they would a real-world incident,
*Hello, would you like to take a survey?* presents new opportunities for both
immersion and storytelling strategy. Only by applying actual techniques for
evading censorship and surveillance will players uncover the whole story of
this interactive novel.

## Development Status

Both the narrative and software of *Hello, would you like to take a survey?*
are under active development. Check back here for updates and test releases as
they become available.

### Footnotes
[^1]: Formally, *Hello, would you like to take a survey?* takes inspiration
      from [*Pry* by Tender Claws Studio]( http://prynovella.com/) and work by
      [Angela Ferraiolo]( http://www.angelaferraiolo.com/).
