---
layout: post
title: Writing3D
date: 2016-07-07
excerpt: "Portable VR for everyone"
project: true
tag:
- dla
- software
comments: false
---

# Writing3D

<iframe allowfullscreen src="/assets/w3d_webgl.html" width="100%"
height="500"></iframe>

## Summary
 **Project webpage**: [https://www.github.com/wphicks/Writing3D](
     https://www.github.com/wphicks/Writing3D)

 **Status**: In development ([Alpha release available](
     https://github.com/wphicks/Writing3D/releases))

 **License**: [GPLv3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html)

## Description

With the increasing availability of consumer-grade virtual reality (VR)
hardware, there is also increasing interest in tools to lower the barrier to
entry for creation of interactive VR content. Given this, Writing3D offers
tools for creation of sophisticated VR experiences that will:

1. Offer non-technical users a point-of-entry into the world of VR
2. Allow technically-savvy users to more rapidly prototype VR projects
3. Facilitate easy extension of these prototypes into more complex VR
   applications
4. Provide a platform for teaching principles of VR development
5. Offer maximal portability across VR devices

With these goals in mind, Writing3D provides an open source Python library and
associated GUI interface for VR content creation. Less technical users or those
experimenting with VR for the first time can access all of Writing3D's features
through the GUI. More technical users, however, can directly access the
underlying Python library to automate creation of more complex VR work.
Finally, since Writing3D uses Blender (an open-source 3D modeling, animation,
and game development platform) as its rendering engine, those users with
extensive modeling experience can seamlessly import any Blender-compatible
model into an interactive VR environment. This multi-tiered approach not only
encourages users with a range of technical expertise to begin developing VR
content but also provides a natural progression for those with less expertise
to acquire new skills.

Writing3D also aims to foster inter-institutional conversations around VR art
and literature by making it possible for the same project to run unmodified
across as many VR devices as possible (including CAVEs at multiple
institutions, Oculus headsets, and others). Furthermore, Writing3D projects can
be saved to an archival, human-readable XML format to ensure that they remain
accessible even with changing technologies.

For complete information about Writing3D and how to use it, check out the
[project homepage on Github]( https://www.github.com/wphicks/Writing3D).

## History

In 2002, Robert Coover established the Cave Writing workshop as part of the
Brown University program in literary arts. In this workshop (which continues
today under the direction of John Cayley), students develop artistic and
literary content for the Brown University Cave. Until recently, this workshop
has been facilitated by custom software known as cwapp, which (much like
Writing3D) allows students to create VR projects regardless of technical
experience. With changing technologies, however, cwapp has become increasingly
difficult to modify or even install across platforms. Furthermore, it must be
recompiled and altered for each new VR hardware target.

Nevertheless, cwapp has allowed students and practicing artists to experiment
with VR for over a decade, resulting in a large "canon" of work that
demonstrates important principles of VR design. By using the same archival XML
format that cwapp employed, Writing3D will make this canon accessible to
researchers across institutions and allow future artists to continue to build
on it.

Perhaps the most important lesson of the Cave Writing workshop is that VR
requires fundamentally different considerations than any other media. By
providing artists of all backgrounds tools to rapidly prototype and experiment
with VR, cwapp (and now Writing3D) offer opportunities to discover techniques
essential to the emerging craft of VR development. Just as widely-available
personal video editing software sparked new innovation in cinema and the spread
of accessible game-development frameworks led to the fertile indie game
ecosystem, tools like Writing3D may help artists push the boundaries of VR
design.
