---
layout: post
title: Riverdottir
date: 2016-07-05
excerpt: "Digital performance based on the myth of Daphne and Apollo"
project: true
tag:
- poetry
- dla
comments: false
---

# Riverdottir

![symmetries_screenshot](/assets/img/Symmetries.png "Symmetries screenshot")

## Summary
 **Medium**: Custom Java software using the Processing library, written for
 live video and musical performance

 **Status**: Complete (2012)

 **Presentation/Publication history**: NEASA Digital Revolutions Conference
 (2012), Brown University Anthology Reading Series (2015)

## Description

*Riverdottir* is a digital performance piece based on the myth of [Daphne and
Apollo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_and_Daphne). At its core is a
single unchanging text, written in conversation with a section of Anja Utler's
[*engulf--enkindle*](http://www.burningdeck.com/catalog/utler.htm) on the same
theme. In order to access the text, however, the audience depends upon the
performer, who reveals the barely-legible words in flickering bursts. By
pressing keys on a standard keyboard, the performer temporarily illuminates
sections of the text beneath simulated waves, simultaneously playing an audible
melody of his or her choosing.

As the performance continues, the audience becomes slowly aware of the sinister
language hiding beneath the pacific audio and appealing visual surface of the
piece. Gradually, the sexual violence and (in Utler's brilliant rendering)
horrifying transformation of the myth become apparent. This realization depends
equally on how the performer chooses to present the piece and what elements of
flickering language each audience member latches onto.

In this slow revelation, *Riverdottir* highlights the complexity of
aestheticized violence and misogyny. Viewers may find themselves attracted by
its conventionally lovely surface, but whether they recoil from its underlying
horror depends on how they (and the performer) direct their attention. In this
way, the piece provides nuance to the conversation around aestheticized
violence without excusing the inherent misogyny of the underlying topic.

## To View

The performance version of *Riverdottir* is available as a runnable jar which
you can [download here](/assets/Riverdottir.jar). To run it, you should first
make sure you have
[Java installed](https://java.com/en/download/help/index_installing.xml) on
your system. You should then be able to double-click on the downloaded jar file
to execute it on most Windows and Mac systems as well as many Linux desktop
environments.

Once the piece is running, tap (do not hold down) a few keys on the keyboard to
get a sense of how the piece can be performed. 

You can also view video documentation[^1] of *Symmetries* below:
<a href="http://www.youtube.com/embed/lSzSw-ZbEbw" target="_blank">
    <img src="http://img.youtube.com/vi/lSzSw-ZbEbw/0.jpg" 
        alt="Symmetries on YouTube" width="240" height="180" border="10" />
</a>

### Footnotes
[^2]: Those readers with a physics background will note that this leaves out
      general relativity (equivalently gravity). Understanding general
      relativity in the framework described here is an open problem, but the
      left-right/up-down symmetry of each poem is a gesture toward the
      Poincar&eacute; group of *special* relativity.

[^1]: Due to Youtube formatting requirements, the video/audio quality is not
      ideal for this documentation, so I encourage you to check out the "live"
      runnable jar version if possible. Finding a way around these limitations
      is high on my ever-overflowing todo list, so you should hopefully see a
      cleaner version next time you visit.
