---
layout: post
title: Clue.py
date: 2017-03-29
excerpt: "A reimagining of Blade Runner as a Clue mystery"
project: true
tag:
- film
comments: false
---

# Clue.py

## Summary
 **Medium**: Live narration over footage from Ridley Scott's [*Blade
 Runner*](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0083658/)

 **Status**: Complete (2014)

 **Presentation/Publication history**: Presented at the Brown University
 Evening of Neo-Benshi, curated by Konrad Steiner

## Description

An homage to the [Japanese tradition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benshi) of
live-narrating silent film, neo-benshi is a practice in which performers
replace the soundtrack of an existing film with their own live performance. In
this particular neo-benshi piece, Ridley Scott's dystopian sci-fi film, *Blade
Runner*, is recast as a [*Clue*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cluedo)-themed
mystery. As the gritty violence of *Blade Runner* plays out on screen, the
performer transfigures the hyper-masculine Rick Deckard, the overtly-victimized
Rachel, and the smug Eldon Tyrell to absurd counterparts in the world of
*Clue*. In this re-imagining, Harrison Ford plays a somewhat dense detective
investigating the death of Mr. Boddy, who had come up with the next great thing
in internet pornography just before he was murdered.

Much of the humor of the piece stems from how little needs to be changed to
divert the grim dystopia of *Blade Runner* into the silliness of *Clue*. The
piece asks its audience to acknowledge some of *Blade Runner*'s excesses
without detracting from its genius. Toward the end, *Clue.py* flips the
established relationship between its source texts, however. The performer
shifts from dubbing over character's lines to reading a code poem memorializing
Mr. Boddy. With this shift, the dark visuals of the film suddenly reassert
their significance. The audience is reminded that both *Blade Runner* and
*Clue* ultimately end in death.

By juxtaposing these two texts, *Clue.py* raises questions about what we allow
ourselves to laugh at and what requires our seriousness. The death of Mr.  Boddy
in *Clue* is just as much of a death as that of Roy in *Blade Runner*, yet only
one demands our respect. In drawing attention to these contradictions,
*Clue.py* invites a more nuanced response to tragedy, making room for both
humor and seriousness.
